AHC | 1113 | Survey of Art and Architecture from Prehistoric Times to  | P | C | | A critical and historical study of art and architecture as it developed from Paleolithic times to 1350 in the various civilizations of Europe, the Near East, and the New World. Course will include selected readings from related fields. May be applied to the Creative Arts Core Curriculum requirements for art and non-art majors.
AHC | 1123 | Survey of Art and Architecture in Europe and the New World from  | P | C | | A critical and historical study of art and architecture as it developed from the Renaissance in Europe and the period of the Aztecs and Incas in the New World to 1750. Course will include selected readings from related fields. May be applied to the Creative Arts Core Curriculum requirement for art and non-art majors.
AHC | 1133 | Survey of Modern Art | P | C | | A critical and historical study of modern art from 1750 to the present. Course will include selected readings from related fields. May be applied to the Creative Arts Core Curriculum requirement for art and non-art majors.
AHC | 3113 | Contemporary Art | P | C | Prerequisite: 3 semester credit hours of lower-division art history. | History, theory, and criticism of the visual arts of the United States and Europe from 1960 to the present. (Formerly AHC 4113. Credit cannot be earned for both AHC 3113 and AHC 4113.).
AHC | 3423 | Arts of Ancient America | P | C | Prerequisite: 3 semester credit hours of lower-division art history. | A critical and historical study of art and architecture in the Western Hemisphere. (Formerly titled “Pre-Columbian Art and Architecture of Mesoamerica.”).
AHC | 3523 | Latin American Art | P | C | Prerequisite: 3 semester credit hours of lower-division art history. | A critical and historical study of art from the independence period to the present.
AHC | 4333 | Topics in Art History and Criticism | P | C | Prerequisite: 3 semester credit hours of lower-division art history passed with a grade of “C-” or better. | Focus on a specific period, medium, or theoretical and critical issue within the history and criticism of art. May be repeated for credit when topics vary.
AHC | 4913 | Independent Study | P | C | Prerequisites: Permission in writing (form available) of the instructor, the student’s advisor, the Department Chair, and the Dean of the College in which the course is offered. | Independent reading, research, discussion and/or critical writing under the direction of a faculty member. May be repeated for credit, but not more than 6 semester credit hours of independent study, regardless of discipline, will apply to a bachelor’s degree.
AHC | 4933 | Art Gallery and Museum Internship | P | C | Prerequisite: Permission in writing (departmental form available). | Supervised experience related to preparation and installation of exhibitions in gallery and museum settings. Students must confer with instructor during the semester prior to enrolling in order to formulate the content of the internship. May be repeated once for credit. Enrollment limited to juniors and seniors with declared major or minor in Art History and Criticism.
ART | 1003 | Two Dimensional Foundations | P | C | Prerequisite: Art or Art History majors only. A grade of “C-” or better must be earned in this course to satisfy the prerequisite for subsequent courses in the Art major. | Exploration of the visual structure and organization of two-dimensional surfaces using a variety of media, with an emphasis on the development of creative and critical skills. This course may not be applied to Core Curriculum requirements. (Formerly titled “Design: Two Dimensional.”).
ART | 1013 | Three Dimensional Foundations | P | C | Prerequisite: Art or Art History majors only. A grade of “C-” or better must be earned in this course to satisfy the prerequisite for subsequent courses in the Art major. | Exploration of the visual structure and organization of multidimensional forms in a variety of materials, with an emphasis on the development of creative and critical skills. This course may not be applied to Core Curriculum requirements. (Formerly titled “Design: Three Dimensional.”).
ART | 1103 | Introduction to Visual Arts | P | C | | A course utilizing images and text designed to offer the general university student an introductory understanding of the broad range of history, interpretations and approaches comprising and applied to the field of visual art. May be applied to the Creative Arts Core Curriculum requirement for non-art majors. This course is designed for non-art majors and cannot be used to fulfill any of the major requirements for the B.A. in Art, the B.A. in Art History and Criticism, or the B.F.A.
ART | 1143 | Art for Non-Art Majors | P | C | | An introduction to the history, fundamental principles, materials, and methods of visual art. Individual course sections will be devoted to the study of a specific art discipline such as drawing, painting, photography, or printmaking. May be repeated for credit when topics vary. May be applied to the Creative Arts Core Curriculum requirement for non-art majors. May not be applied to the degree requirements for a major in art.
ART | 1213 | Drawing I | P | C | Prerequisite: This course is restricted to Art and Art History majors. A grade of “C-” or better must be earned in this course to satisfy the prerequisite for subsequent courses in the Art major. | Introduction to fundamental principles, materials, and techniques using a variety of drawing media. Emphasizes drawing from observation as a means to develop perceptual and technical skills for visual expression. Includes perspective and other systems of spatial organization. This course may not be applied to Core Curriculum requirements.
ART | 1223 | Drawing II | P ART 1213 | C | Prerequisites: ART 1213; Art or Art History majors only. A grade of “C-” or better must be earned in this course to satisfy the prerequisite for subsequent courses in the Art major. | Continued experience with fundamental principles, materials, and techniques emphasizing drawing from observation. Experiences in a variety of media provide opportunities for further development of perceptual and technical skills for visual expression. This course may not be applied to Core Curriculum requirements.
ART | 2113 | Painting | P ART 1003 ART 1223 | C | Prerequisites: ART 1003 and ART 1223. | Instruction in basic painting concepts, skills, and materials with an emphasis on the use of oil paint and oil mediums.
ART | 2223 | New Media | P ART 1003 | C | Prerequisite: ART 1003. | This course emphasizes the exploration of new methods and means of art making with contemporary media, and builds upon traditional art processes and concepts. It is an introduction to the essentials of using digital tools, providing an opportunity to learn a broad range of skills and techniques such as the fundamentals of Adobe Photoshop® and Illustrator®, preparation for printing, digital still cameras, scanning, and CD burning. Basic digital concepts covered include the operating system, storage media, directory structure, bitmap vs. vector graphic, and file conversions.
ART | 2313 | Photography | P ART 1003 | C | Prerequisite: ART 1003. | This introductory level course will offer instruction on camera controls, black &amp; white and color image development in a digital darkroom, in-house printing, file management, documentation of 2-D and 3-D artwork, online publishing, and digital montage primarily through the use of Adobe software. Projects emphasize both aesthetic and conceptual development through the introduction of historic and contemporary photographic genres. Students must have access to a digital SLR camera. Previous computer experience is helpful, but not required. Transfer students who have not had experience with digital darkroom must enroll in this course before proceeding to Photography: Intermediate and Advanced Topics (ART 3513 and ART 4533). (Formerly ART 2513.).
ART | 2413 | Printmaking | P ART 1003 ART 1223 | C | Prerequisites: ART 1003 and ART 1223. | Introduction to printmaking processes, concepts, and materials.
ART | 2613 | Sculpture | P ART 1013 | C | Prerequisite: ART 1013. | Instruction in basic sculptural concepts and materials.
ART | 2713 | Ceramics | P ART 1003 | C | Prerequisite: ART 1003. | Students will be given the opportunity to learn basic ceramic concepts and techniques including wheel throwing, slab building, coil construction, and glazing, to create vessel and sculptural forms. Emphasis is placed on technical execution and the use of the material for personal expression. Students will also participate in team loading, unloading, and firing kilns. Lectures/presentations provide a general introduction to historical and contemporary ceramic artists and influences.
ART | 3023 | Color Theory and Practice | P ART 1003 ART 1013 ART 1223 | C | Prerequisites: ART 1003, ART 1013, and ART 1223. | Exploration of color theories and the practical use of color in its many different aspects including additive, subtractive, and 3-dimensional color; color mixing; interactions of color and light; color symbolism; and creative applications in various art media. Course format consists of lectures, student presentations, and assigned studio projects.
ART | 3033 | Contemporary Studio | P | C | Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of 9 semester credit hours of any three 2000-level art courses, and 6 semester credit hours of AHC courses. | Interdisciplinary studio projects generated from lectures, readings and discussion, focusing on critical and cultural issues from the 1970s to the present. Projects are intended to encourage collaborative efforts and nontraditional solutions. Required of all B.F.A. degree candidates.
ART | 3113 | Painting II | P ART 1003 ART 1223 ART 2113 | C | Prerequisites: ART 1003, ART 1223, and ART 2113. | Continued study of the methods and materials of painting connecting color, form, and composition to image and idea development. This course emphasizes the use of oil paint and oil mediums. Transfer students who have not had experience with oil paint must enroll in this course before proceeding to Painting III. May be repeated once for credit with instructor permission.
ART | 3133 | Painting III | P ART 3113 | C | Prerequisite: ART 3113 or consent of instructor. | Structured advanced painting projects that present a variety of approaches to painting with an aim to furthering both competence and an individual viewpoint in relation to historical and contemporary issues. Although a variety of media may be used at the instructor’s discretion, all students must have had previous experience using oil paint. Transfer students who have not had experience with oil paint must enroll in ART 3113. Sections focusing on a special topic such as abstraction or the figure will occasionally be offered. May be repeated for credit.
ART | 3223 | Drawing | P ART 1223 | C | Prerequisite: ART 1223. | Study of the human figure and its historical and contemporary implications for the artist, including anatomical and structural dynamics, gesture, narrative, and issues concerning the body as subject. May be repeated for credit.
ART | 3233 | Drawing | P ART 1223 | C | Prerequisite: ART 1223. | Structured drawing projects assigned with an emphasis on the interrelationship of drawing and space. Explores a range of spatial models including observational, abstract, and physical. May be repeated once for credit.
ART | 3513 | Photography | P ART 2313 | C | Prerequisite: ART 2313. | Students will build on technical knowledge through introduction of 35mm and medium film formats as well as black &amp; white techniques and laboratory procedures. Students will further conceptual exploration of photography as a fine art medium through projects that explore historic and contemporary genres. Students must have access to a 35mm analog (film) SLR camera. Transfer students who have not had experience with traditional darkroom must enroll in this course before proceeding to Photography: Advanced Topics. This course cannot be repeated for additional credit.
ART | 4033 | Studio Art Problems | P | C | Prerequisite: Satisfactory completion of any two 2000-level art courses. | An advanced exploration of visual art ideas and practices using various media, materials, and processes. Occasionally may be devoted to a specific topic of study. May be repeated for credit when topics vary.
ART | 4133 | Painting  | P ART 3133 ART 3233 | C | Prerequisites: ART 3133 or ART 3233 and consent of instructor. | Development of an individual direction in painting or drawing (including mixed media, hybrid forms, and experimental approaches) emphasizing the successful synthesis of material, technical, formal and conceptual qualities specific to each student’s work.  Additional emphasis is given to the understanding and articulation of historical and contemporary issues in the theory and practice of painting and drawing. Other course work, such as reading and/or writing assignments may be  required to complement individual studio work. Students repeating ART 4133 will be required to demonstrate an advanced and expanded performance building on their accomplishments in prior sections of ART 4133. Permission of instructor is required for enrollment in this course. Admission is based on student’s demonstrated ability to undertake the development of a focused and proficient body of work with dedicated time in the studio environment. May be repeated for credit.
ART | 4233 | Drawing | P ART 3233 | C | Prerequisites: ART 3233 and consent of instructor. | Diverse topics with an emphasis on contemporary drawing practices such as drawing and the body, drawing and duration, and drawing and site. May be repeated for credit. (Formerly titled “Drawing III.”).
ART | 4313 | New Media | P ART 2223 | C | Prerequisite: ART 2223. | The focus of this course is on new media as an extension of fine arts practice. Depending on the term topic, there may be instruction in static and/or non-static electronic media, including various forms such as digital print, Web, video, animation, and sound. Students will be encouraged to use digital and other new media tools experimentally to create original electronically generated art that amplifies and extends image making beyond traditional techniques. ART 4313 may be repeated for credit. Specific UTSA Department of Art and Art History degree plans require students to take this course multiple times, up to 15 credit hours (including Internship and Independent Study where the work falls primarily in the discipline of New Media). Students are expected to enroll in varying sections of ART 4313 in order to expand their knowledge of diverse new media: New Media: Video; New Media: Sound; New Media: Animation; New Media: Web. Students will be required to demonstrate an advanced and expanded performance, which includes execution of artwork, progression in digital media literacy and writing ability, building on their accomplishments in prior sections of ART 4313. This process of developing a refined skill set is time consuming and individualized to each student, as are the benchmarks of material, process and conceptual success that characterize each student’s work. Students taking ART 4313 for additional credit will be evaluated on an increased mastery of the skill sets defined above in the learning outcomes of this course. Increased mastery of skills will include but not be limited to: The exploration of an additional area of digital media not used in prior semesters; The experimentation with, and the refinement of, an additional process(es) not used in prior semesters; Improved personal standard of quality demonstrated by a refinement in the sophistication of conceptual, material and process success that characterize the student’s work; A demonstrated improvement of the student’s ability or skill to formulate and verbally articulate his or her developing artistic direction measured against performance in prior semesters as well as over the course of the semester; An increased and more specific understanding of the history of new media especially directed towards the interests and investigations of the student. (Formerly titled “Multimedia Art.”).
ART | 4433 | Printmaking | P ART 2413 | C | Prerequisite: ART 2413. | An emphasis on the development of a personal vision and individual approach to the use of the medium, including experimentation in multiple processes. ART 4433 may be repeated for credit. Specific UTSA Department of Art and Art History degree plans require students to take this course multiple times up to 15 credit hours (including Internship and Independent Study where the work falls primarily in the discipline of printmaking). Students enrolling in ART 4433 will be required to demonstrate an advanced and expanded performance building on their accomplishments in prior sections of ART 4433. This process of developing a refined skill set is time consuming and individualized to each student as are the benchmarks of material, process and conceptual success that characterize each student’s work. Students taking ART 4433 for additional credit will be evaluated on an increased mastery of the skill sets defined above in the learning outcomes of this course. Increased mastery of skills will include but not be limited to: The exploration of an additional material(s) not used in prior semesters; The experimentation with, and the refinement of, an additional process(es) not used in prior semesters; Improved personal standard of quality demonstrated by a refinement in the sophistication of conceptual, material and process success that characterize the student’s work; A demonstrated improvement of the student’s ability or skill to formulate and verbally articulate his or her developing artistic direction measured against performance in prior semesters as well as over the course of the semester; An increased and more specific understanding of the history of printmaking especially directed towards the interests and investigations of the student.
ART | 4533 | Photography | P ART 2313 ART 3513 | C | Prerequisites: ART 2313 and ART 3513. | Emphasis on the development of a personal voice through exploration of advanced photographic techniques, concepts as well as self-defined projects. Students will build knowledge and understanding of photography as a fine art medium. Topics may include: Non-Silver and Alternative Processes; Controlled Lighting; Advanced Black and White; Image-Based Performance, Intervention, and Installation; Advanced Color and Digital Darkroom; Primitive Technologies–Pinhole and Toy Cameras. Transfer students who have not had experience with both digital and traditional darkroom must enroll in ART 2313 and ART 3513 before proceeding to Photography: Advanced Topics. While each offered topic may be repeated once for credit, students who chose photography as their emphasis area should take a minimum of four of the offered topics. ART 4533 may be repeated for credit. Specific UTSA Department of Art and Art History degree plans require students to take this course multiple times up to 15 credit hours (including Internship and Independent Study where the work falls primarily in the discipline of Photography). Students enrolling in ART 4533 will be required to demonstrate an advanced and expanded performance building on their accomplishments in prior sections of ART 4533. This process of developing a refined skill set is time consuming and individualized to each student as are the benchmarks of material, process and conceptual success that characterize each student’s work. Students taking ART 4533 for additional credit will be evaluated on an increased mastery of the skill sets defined above in the learning outcomes of this course. Increased mastery of skills will include but not be limited to: The exploration of an additional material(s) not used in prior semesters; The experimentation with, and the refinement of, an additional processes(s) not used in prior semesters; Improved personal standard of quality demonstrated by a refinement in the sophistication of conceptual, material and process success that characterize the student’s work; A demonstrated improvement of the student’s ability or skill to formulate and verbally articulate his or her developing artistic direction measured against performance in prior semesters as well as over the course of the semester; An increased and more specific understanding of the history of photography especially directed towards the interests and investigations of the student. (Formerly titled “Photography.”).
ART | 4673 | Sculpture | P ART 1003 ART 2613 | C | Prerequisites: ART 1003 and ART 2613. | An emphasis on the development of a personal vision and individual approach to the use of the medium. ART 4673 may be repeated for credit. Specific UTSA Department of Art and Art History degree plans require students to take this course multiple times up to 15 credit hours (including Internship and Independent Study where the work falls primarily in the discipline of Sculpture). Students enrolling in ART 4673 will be required to demonstrate an advanced and expanded performance building on their accomplishments in prior sections of ART 4673. This process of developing a refined skill set is time consuming and individualized to each student as are the benchmarks of material, process and conceptual success that characterize each student’s work. Students taking ART 4673 for additional credit will be evaluated on an increased mastery of the skill sets defined above in the learning outcomes of this course. Increased mastery of skills will include but not be limited to: The exploration of an additional material(s) not used in prior semesters; The experimentation with, and the refinement of, an additional processes(s) not used in prior semesters; Improved personal standard of quality demonstrated by a refinement in the sophistication of conceptual, material and process success that characterize the student’s work; A demonstrated improvement of the student’s ability or skill to formulate and verbally articulate his or her developing artistic direction measured against performance in prior semesters as well as over the course of the semester; An increased and more specific understanding of the history of sculpture especially directed towards the interests and investigations of the student.
ART | 4753 | Ceramics | P ART 1003 ART 1013 ART 2713 | C | Prerequisites: ART 1003, ART 1013, and ART 2713. | An exploration of advanced techniques and processes including large-scale ceramic sculpture, the use of armatures, and clay body and glaze development. Emphasis is placed on technical execution and the use of the material for personal expression. Readings, lectures, and presentations are designed to broaden the students’ historical and contemporary reference. ART 4753 may be repeated for credit. Specific UTSA Department of Art and Art History degree plans require students to take this course multiple times up to 15 credit hours (including Internship and Independent Study where the work falls primarily in the discipline of Ceramics). Students enrolling in ART 4753 will be required to demonstrate an advanced and expanded performance building on their accomplishments in prior sections of ART 4753. This process of developing a refined skill set is time consuming and individualized to each student, as are the benchmarks of material, process and conceptual success that characterize each student’s work. Students taking ART 4753 for additional credit will be evaluated on an increased mastery of the skill sets defined above in the learning outcomes of this course. Increased mastery of skills will include but not be limited to: The exploration of an additional material(s) not used in prior semesters; The experimentation with, and the refinement of, an additional processes(s) not used in prior semesters; Improved personal standard of quality demonstrated by a refinement in the sophistication of conceptual, material and process success that characterize the student’s work; A demonstrated improvement of the student’s ability or skill to formulate and verbally articulate his or her developing artistic direction measured against performance in prior semesters as well as over the course of the semester; An increased and more specific understanding of the history of ceramics especially directed towards the interests and investigations of the student.
ART | 4833 | Internship in the Visual Arts | P | C | Prerequisite: Permission in writing (departmental form available). | Students will participate in projects on an individual basis. The practical application of art methods and principles in such projects as providing special art programs or exhibition assistance to organizations and providing technical studio assistance for artists. Students must confer with instructor during the semester prior to enrolling in order to formulate the content of the internship. May be repeated for credit. (Formerly titled “Practicum in the Visual Arts.”).
ART | 4913 | Independent Study | P | C | Prerequisites: Permission in writing (form available) of the instructor, the student’s advisor, the Department Chair, and the Dean of the College in which the course is offered. | Independent studio projects produced under the direction of a faculty member. May be repeated for credit, but not more than 6 semester credit hours of independent study, regardless of discipline, will apply to a bachelor’s degree. This course may be used only under extraordinary conditions when a self-directed student needs special instruction in an area of studio art not offered within normal course offerings.
ART | 4953 | Special Studies in Art | P | C | Prerequisite: Consent of instructor. | An organized course offering the opportunity for specialized study not normally or not often available as part of the regular course offerings. Special Studies may be repeated for credit when topics vary, but not more than 6 semester credit hours, regardless of discipline, will apply to a bachelor’s degree.
ART | 4983 | Senior Seminar and Exhibition | P ART 3033 | C | Prerequisites: ART 3033, and must have completed application for graduation. | This course prepares the student in the professional concerns of aesthetics, art practices, and exhibition. The student will prepare work for a group exhibition in consultation with both the class instructor and a faculty advisor from his or her studio area of specialization.
